---
layout: post
title:  "The Next 100 Years Review"
date:   2015-02-08 15:45
categories: books
comments: true
disqus_id: "the_next_100_years_review"
---
<img class="right-image" src="/assets/the-next-100-years.jpg"
alt="The Next 100 Years: A Forecast for the 21st Century">

I first heard about this book in an
[online investment forum](http://bogleheads.org) while checking out
the forum members discussion on [The Big Short]({% post_url 2015-02-07-the-big-short-review %}) book which I had just finished
back then. I looked up this book and found that it was written by the
same guy, **George Friedman**, who founded **STRATFOR**, the
geopolitical think tank. My old boss used to subscribe to STRATFOR
newsletters and swears they are one of the best newsletters out there
when it comes to understanding world events and geopolitics. So
naturally my interest was piqued and I picked up this book to give it
a read.

The author claims in this book that he's uniquely positioned to see
the outline of major events that is going to happen in the 21st
century. He argues he has a good understanding of the history of
geopolitics and the current events, so with some accuracy he can
predict how events are going to unfold in the world stage. He supports
this by saying lot of people in power knew that World Wars I and II
were imminent as early as 1890's and that Germany would be the
aggressor in both cases and that turned out to be true. People
predicted, long before WW II ended, the cold war and eventual fall of
the Soviet Union, leaving United States as the single most powerful
country in the world, and that turned out to be 100% accurate. Now the
details might be off in all these predictions, he argues, but the big
picture remains more or less the same and that's what he provides in
this book. He does go into specific time lines and details but that's
more of a fun account of what could happen.

I was fascinated by the historical events that happened since the 15th
century. It's not comprehensive but gives a good outline of how
Western Europe came into power, the events surrounding the two World
Wars, the decline of European empire, the rise and fall of Soviet
Union and the rise of United States. I've come to appreciate world
history after reading this book. Did you know that California, Nevada,
Southern Utah, Southern Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico and Texas was
part of Mexico until mid 19th Century? That's like half of the current
United States! After the Texas rebellion and US-Mexican war in 1850's,
US defeated Mexico and *annexed* all the aforementioned states. This
could be common knowledge for Americans but this was eye opening for
me.

After going through the history, the author writes about geopolitical
predictions for the 21st century. He basically makes a strong case why
United States is going to be the most powerful country in the world
for the next 100 years. He attributes this primarily due to the
*complete* control of the oceans and seas by US Navy, the geographical
location of the United States in North America having access to both
Atlantic and Pacific oceans, the eventual commercial and military
space domination and also the inevitable easing up of immigration
policies to address labor shortages due to population decline.

I read all the predictions as more of a science fiction account than
as a recipe of what will follow in the future. I just find it really
hard to believe anyone knows anything when it comes to what's going to
happen in the world in the next 5 years much less 100 years. For
instance, the author dismisses China playing an important role in the
21st century for various reasons. He lays out his road map for rise of
Turkey as a major regional power which will form an alliance with
Japan to become a global power that will rival United States and wage
war on global scale (World War III?). Mexico is given a lot of
importance in this book as well, where the author says could rival US
eventually at the turn of the 22nd century. He predicts robots will
not displace workers on a mass scale until 2080 and immigration will
be key for every advanced country to further its economy, which I find
hard to believe. If anything the rise of robots could be way
sooner. One of the major problems that he talks about in several
chapters in the book is the declining global population. That is going
to put a serious wrench into the growth model that every modern
economy is based on. That does sound really disturbing. It will be fun
to look back at this book around the year 2050 and reconcile what's
happened and what was laid out in this here.

There are also really cool accounts of what type of weapons could be
deployed by the military forces around the world, what kind of energy
production and storage is possible and how space commercialization and
colonization begins to take place. I really enjoyed reading this
book. The words were easy and I seldom opened up the dictionary which
resulted in an uninterrupted and faster read. It's a fun read and I
rate it 4 stars. There's another book that this author wrote called
the `The Next 10 Years` which I think might be interesting as well and
that would be my next read sometime this year.
