---
layout: post
title:  "The Big Short Review"
date:   2015-02-07 15:30
categories: books
comments: true
disqus_id: "the_big_short_review"
---
<img class="right-image" src="/assets/images/the-big-short.jpg"
alt="The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine">

I've heard about Michael Lewis a little bit, more so after he released
his latest book on algorithmic trading in 2014 called Flash
Boys. During and after the book came out, there was lot of commentary
online, especially on Hacker News, which I found really fascinating. I
didn't understand 90% of the things being written and debated, but
nevertheless it invoked some interest in me. I wanted to start reading
few of his books and I was surprised to find this book, The Big Short:
Inside the Doomsday Machine, for under a dollar at Goodwill and I
thought I'd give it a read. If anyone doesn't know Mr.Lewis, he also
wrote Moneyball which came out as a movie starring Brad Pitt.

The Big Short traces back the source that led to the 2008 global
financial crisis which destroyed trillions of dollars of wealth and
millions of jobs. Having that as the backdrop the book goes into a
nice account of all these smart and persistent people in the finance
industry who knew what was happening from as early as 2005 and took
advantage of it to make millions, nay, billions of dollars.

The book is really easy to read and almost sounds like financial
fiction. It's not heavy in math or formulas and is perfect for someone
who doesn't come from a finance background. Credit Default Swaps
(CDS), Credit Debt Obligations (CDO), short selling, derivatives and
other financial terms are explained very clearly. Since the books is
mostly about CDS and CDOs, if you understand these concepts right then
it's going to be a much easier read.

After reading this book you are going to get livid about big banks,
wall street firms, lenders and more importantly the rating agencies
and with good measure. The rating agencies are the worst and are
portrayed as such. They are the ones that should have done their due
diligence and instead they rated a pile of crappy derivatives as
triple A and facilitated the transaction between the sellers and big
pensions funds, insurance agencies and institutional investors. It's
amazing to see how clueless most of the investors were, buying these
derivatives tied to sub-prime loans. They blindly trusted S&amp;P,
Moodys or Fitch ratings of these sub-prime derivatives and didn't do
their homework to see what's actually inside these packages. What's
missing was the whip against SEC. I thought the book would go more
into the incompetency of SEC or FED and their inaction and inability
to police the financial industry but I guess that's a volume onto
itself.

More importantly the book focuses on the lives of these small group of
people - mostly hedge fund managers and traders working for them - who
dug into the Sub-prime mortgage industry and silently accumulated
short positions from 2005, a full three years before the explosion of
the super volcano. The books explains the methods they employed to
study the sub-prime loans, understand CDOs and their default rates and
create a market for Sub-prime CDS to exploit the foolishness and
greediness of everyone from lower class American citizens to lenders
to investment banks & mega wall street firms. I have to be honest here
in that before reading this book I didn't have much sympathy for the
homeowners who took way more debt that they can handle and had to go
through financial hardships after the crash. But after reading about
the lending industry it's clear that they facilitated such things to
happen and in fact outright lied to the people who they were lending
to about the economics of home ownership, interest rates and the
promise of uninterrupted rise in their home prices.

I bet the situation is even more complex than what's portrayed in the
book about the financial crisis but it's a good overview of the
situation and does a good job of telling the story to a layman like
me. In the end it's pleasurable to read about these small band of
people who made out with a lot of money by betting on the incredible
stupidity of Wall Street (or was it arrogance?). I rate this book 4
stars and I'm looking forward to read the rest of the books written by
Mr.Lewis.
