---
layout: post
title:  "Teaching Teens HTML and CSS"
date:   2015-03-31 08:21
categories: webdev
comments: true
disqus_id: "html_css_101_teen_program"
---
Few weeks ago I volunteered at my local library to teach teens web
development. One weekend I taught HTML basics and the next weekend I
followed up with elementary CSS. I've never taught anyone anything
before so this was a new experience for me and I want to write about
it.

There were about 7 teens for the first class on HTML and about 4 for
CSS. I expected a lot more with my first class but I was happy with
the turnout and since CSS class was based on the HTML class, the lower
turnout for CSS was expected. There were a mix of girls and boys with
age range between 12 and 18. We provided laptops for those who
didn't/couldn't bring their own computers. I noticed that some kids
didn't even know how to type an angle brace because they don't have a
personal computer at home but instead just use iPad/iPhone or some
other tablet or phone, which is interesting on its own. Some kids were
flying through the HTML basics completing their tasks even before I
get to finish my slides because they have already taken CodeAcademy
classes on web development. It was an interesting and little bit eye
opening session for me.

When I first signed up to do this I thought this would be really easy
to do since teaching HTML and CSS basics is not that hard. I've been
using HTML and CSS for a long time now and even though I don't know
the inns and outs of every single tag or CSS property (especially with
the ones in HTML5 and CSS3) how hard would it be to come up with a
hands-on teaching for teens? Well, apparently it was hard for me. I
spent a lot of time making the presentation and coming with a plan to
teach. I probably put in a lot more time and effort into the
preparation because I had no idea what teens learned nowadays on their
own or in their school curriculum and so I couldn't access the level
and/or pace at which I should go about teaching the class.

I thought both the classes went well but who knows what they actually
learned. In both the classes all of the teens did make a really simple
website some form or the other and got hands on experience using both
HTML and CSS. I made them use Sublime Text instead of the crappy
Notepad and asked them to invest time in a good text editor if they
are going to continue web development or any other programming.

I made the presentations using Prezi so I've attached both of them
below if it helps anyone else plan a similar session :) It's free to
use!

<iframe frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen="" mozallowfullscreen=""
allowfullscreen="" width="550" height="400"
src="https://prezi.com/embed/jzpouirexo_a/?bgcolor=ffffff&amp;lock_to_path=0&amp;autoplay=0&amp;autohide_ctrls=0#"></iframe>
[HTML 101](https://prezi.com/jzpouirexo_a/html-101/)

<iframe frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen="" mozallowfullscreen=""
allowfullscreen="" width="550" height="400"
src="https://prezi.com/embed/zt_ae8cmbvaj/?bgcolor=ffffff&amp;lock_to_path=0&amp;autoplay=0&amp;autohide_ctrls=0#"></iframe>
[CSS 101](https://prezi.com/zt_ae8cmbvaj/css-101/)
