---
layout: post
title:  "If You Could Be Mine Review"
date:   2015-04-03 08:30
categories: books
comments: true
disqus_id: "if_you_could_be_mine_review"
---
<img class="right-image" src="/assets/if-you-could-be-mine.jpg"
alt="If You Could Be Mine">

I would have never read a book like **If You Could Be Mine** in a
million years if it wasn't for the book club I'm in. This book was
March pick so I had to read it. Lesbian Teenage Romance Fiction is not
typically my genre but I was willing to give it a try since it was
small enough to be able to finish in couple days.

This book is set in present day Iran and more specifically in Tehran,
the capital. It's a fiction of course but I assume most of the details
about their society is accurate, which is what interested me in
reading this book more than the romance itself. It's about two girls
who from young age grew up close and were in love with each other and
when they turn 18 they realize they can't continue being together
forever because of the laws of their ultra conservative society. The
story was meh but I learned a lot of interesting things about the
society which I assume must be at least partly true.

It appears from the book that there's some french influence in Iranian
culture. They drive Peugeot's, wear manteaus and their entrance exams
to University is called Concours. There is of course American
influence as well but it's mostly underground and illegal. All
American films must go through Iranian Film Board where they get
censored, digitally remastered to cover human bodies with black
clothes (?) and dubbed in Persian. American music is bootlegged and
dealt underground too.

Few other things I learned include that women always need to wear
their head scarf when they are in public and cover their elbows and
knees. When they ride a bus they need to be at the back of the bus and
men in the front so they are separated. Women can't walk out at night
without having a parent or guardian. There's no LGBT rights and LGBT
people are stoned to death or hung in public for their gross
actions. This punishment also applies for people who cheat on their
spouses but I assume it mostly only applies to women. Since a woman's
face is the most exposed part, naturally all the girls try to do odd
things to attract boys like shave their eyebrows off completely and
have tattoos instead or to have nose jobs. Sex change operations is
not frowned upon by the government in fact they even pay for it, it
looks like. Men have the most rights and freedom. It's a true hell to
be a women in Iranian society and even worse for a lesbian one. And
apparently it was different before 1979 when Iran was under the Kings
rule. Women wore mini skirts and had lot more rights but after the
fall of Shah in 1979 Iran was installed with a theocratic government.

As for the story itself it was not the greatest. There's typical
teenage angst, helplessness and irrational behavior. It's a good book
if you are clueless about Iranian society and want to get a little
flavor of life in Iran specifically through a teenage girls eyes. This
is also supposed to happen in the Capital which typically is more
liberal so you can imagine how backward it would be as you move away
from Tehran. I give this book 2 stars.
